---
permalink: /computers/display/reading/
layout: layout
title: Reading
---

<h1 class="center"> Screen Reading </h1>

## As Compared to Print and eReaders

Cognitive maps are determinative factor. Want to make it easiest to form cognitive maps.
- Display two pages side by side like in print. Sweet spot between 1 column and more columns that don’t add helpful spatial understanding (and make relationships more confusing).
- TOC and hierarchical organizational structure. Always visible sidebar with shortened descriptions (as necessary) — up to 3+ (?) layers, and toggleable full-description layout. Follows Orgmode ideas of organization.
- Progress bar for both current subheading (be able to choose level) and total progress in work as whole. Subheading bar on top of whole text bar (bars located at bottom of reading area).
  - Subheading progress not available in print — no haptic equivalent.
  - Sometimes haptic equivalent in print is not used: e.g., reading with book on chest, reading on side, holding book with one hand — situations in which weight of either collection of pages is not resting on hands. Better to be consistent in judging location ⇒ use always present visual cues rather than haptics or combination.
  - Lack of sensory discernment between pages (since pages weigh so little), disadvantages of coarse grain perception in constructing cognitive map vs finer grain that visual cues allow.
  - Haptic clues can also be deceptive, e.g. indexes and glossaries. May encode positional cues just fine, but will “inaccurate” percentage wise.
- Colors to indicate progress — color both progress bars and highlight color of current location in TOC (both sidebar and expanded version). Go across visual spectrum: adjustable increments (e.g., change every 0.5% of the way through, 1%, 5%, etc.), or allow selection of colors according to shade/darkness/intensity etc. Make customizable according to user preferences.
- Header to reading area with current work, subsection, page number in whole work, and page number in section. Use format like 7/1 to indicate that the top left corner of a page refers to the seventh page of one section but first page of the next.
- Include figures/pictures etc. to offer anchor points in text for forming “landmark-esque” cues to tie back to other information in cognitive map. Same deal with bulleted lists or other memorable structures.
- Fixed display as with print. Since spatial information is automatically encoded, can help when referencing back to recently read material by only checking relevant area rather than having to navigate according to full semantic structure of every page.
  - Does not necessarily need to sync up with page numbers in eBooks (Logos), just needs to be consistent (so that when navigating with the menu structure it won’t put you at the top when you would be in the middle if you had read through, e.g. = different starting points should not yield different text layouts). 
  - Better to have footnotes be accessible only by link/click/hover etc. rather than disrupting cognitive map (another reason doesn’t need to match page numbers from print perfectly).
  - Study did not find differences in statistics when they switched physical layouts on the subjects.
    - Perhaps subjects not reading as closely as would in studying = remember less spatial locations of text. No re-reading/review would theoretically also lead to less recall of physical locations of information.
    - Perhaps subjects not accustomed to using physical locations to find information by scanning only relevant locations. Such behavior may be learned and applied consistently only by those who pay attention to it.
    - Perhaps difference existed but was only slight, and hence not statistically significant in this case. Small differences, on the order of seconds, may not seem like much, but will still add up over time.
    - Discrete articles that each have a defined beginning, middle, and end may provide a less useful environment for physical page cues than one longer chunk of information that is not subdivided. E.g., remembering that the target information was near the beginning of one of the articles (“top left column of the first page”) will result in quick acquisition of the data regardless if the exact physical location is slightly changed (because while there may only be one column now the information is still in a very similar spot relative to a fixed position clue — i.e., “beginning” — leading to insignificant changes in speed), whereas “near the beginning” is much less useful if you have a longer continuous passage. (This logic provides a good argument for splitting up texts into discrete sections within a hierarchy rather than just leaving it in one big lump).
      - Essentially, sections in a longer piece would function as the articles from the study. As long as you remembered a piece of information’s location relative to the beginning/middle/end of a section, page cues would be relatively less important.
      - Basically, due to the short length of the articles, all a subject had to due to transmute their physical page cue from double column to single column was roughly judge in the single column the same relative position in the text, which would be significantly less useful if texts were longer. =no significant changes in speed here even if page cues are faster in other circumstances.
      - Also, the shift from two columns to one column is entirely predictable. This differs from a scenario with eBooks where due to whatever pagination scheme the text remains in two columns but shifts forward or backward some amount (rather than always being positioned down somewhat further due to reduction in total text space).
  - Study did not take into account the effects of “expected position” if flipping back and forth, which is another relevant factor when learning/studying. If you go five pages back to look at something but then you position has shifted when you return, that’s a problem. = want fixed text regardless of considerations from study.
  - No scrolling! Scrolling leads to higher cognitive load and worse comprehension.
- How do you explain the fact that in a series of “nearly linear” pages (approximating sections read in order in a chapter, e.g.), there was not a strong correlation between how close first guesses were to actual location and the number of pages opened? (Expected behavior: that guesses in same general area of linear progression even if not in right article first time would lead to less overall pages needing to be opened — because subjects remembered content proximity and relative time distance, i.e., whether the target was “near the beginning of the progression” or “near the end of the progression”).
  - “When participants were wrong in their ﬁrst guess about the location of a target fact, the efﬁciency of their search (in terms of the number of pages that they looked in) was no better than might be expected by chance, and not helped by prior reading of the document. These ﬁndings suggest that recall of location is ‘all or nothing’. This suggestion is supported by the correlational analysis in Experiment 2 which found no relation between the size of the error in the page ﬁrst opened and the length of the subsequent search in terms of number-of-pages visited.”
  - “This evidence for structure maps in terms of documents ﬁrst searched in does not extend to the number of pages opened during search. When participants do not know where ﬁrst to look, their performance appears to be at chance, with some extremely long searches.”
  - ⇒ recalling position is “all or nothing”. If you can place something in your cognitive map you wouldn’t be wrong in the first place. = guessing when you don’t know shouldn’t be much/any better than chance, regardless of how close you were the first time.
  - Proximity cues (“I remember reading this recently so it can’t have been in one of the articles I read far back” or “I don’t remember reading this recently so it must be in one of the articles I read far back”) are likely strongly dependent on time. The fact that subjects were asked to write/answer questions between reading and searching would thus have contributed to an absence of these sorts of effects (that would otherwise probably be present). ⇒  A period of activity other than reading/re-reading leads to viewing the readings more as one group in the past than as a spectrum across time. ⇒ intervening activities lead to degradation of temporal/sequence cues.
    - “The writing and scale-checking activities served to separate the read and search phase, by about 15 min. Once these were completed the search phase began.”
    - Example: While you may be able to distinguish between the articles you read today and those you read yesterday, distinguishing the location of information in yesterday’s readings based on yesterday’s reading order would prove much harder.
    - Also will decay with time simply when reading. Easier to remember proximity information for more recently read articles than articles earlier in reading period.
    - Also will decay with total number of articles/total amount of material read (probably becomes most significant at 3+ things — situations in which “recently” and “not recently” no longer cover the sample space). For the same reason organization into sections biases page location conclusions (makes it easier to relate to beginning/end regardless of page location), so too is a lower amount of read content easier to organize sequentially because there is less fuzzy “middle” area to cover between “recently” and “not recently”.
    - Essentially, can cognitively categorize into “recent” (last article/section), or “not recent” (not last article/section), but distinctions within “not recent” will be less accurate — because it’s hard to determine location only from the knowledge that information is “sometime in the past” versus “the last thing I read”.
    - Effect really only relevant for parallel searches of multiple writings on same topic (as here) where information actually could have come from multiple different places. In a textbook chapter, if you have information about a certain topic, it is likely that it could only really fit in in one place (or at least a short list of places) rather than anywhere. Same deal with notes from lecture, etc.
    - Cognitive maps will be most accurate for most recent material. Hypothesis: subjects should be more accurate in eliminating the last article they read (or perhaps last two) from the search if the target information was not in them than for earlier articles.
    - May posit that effect would only really be observable in a short time-frame after reading the last article: splitting up search activity and reading leads to enough degradation that the effect is no longer very great.
    - All this doesn’t differ between screens and books anyway.
- But enable a scrolling mode to allow for superior scanning ability and avoiding page breaks in the middle of sections you need to read/re-read. (Scrolling is much better for scanning a large amount of content — which is why it is so common for web pages).
- Landscape for things that ordinarily have one column of text on two pages (like paperbacks and other books) and portrait for things where you have two/three columns on one letter-sized page (like many journal articles).
- Ought to have intuitive highlighting, underlining, annotation (with ability to link to words, sentences, or paragraphs; ability to convert handwriting to text — for search etc. — but keep handwriting; ability to put links in notes; ability to customize how/when annotations show, hover bahvior, etc.), bookmarking (with instantaneous ability to set and remove multiple bookmarks, some means for bookmarks to be descriptive of the text they mark, and easy commands to go to specific bookmarks). Should be able to press and drag for highlighting and underlining, but also be able to use tap selection: 1 tap = word, 2 taps = sentence, 3 taps = paragraph. (Be able to adjust how fast taps must be in succession to register).
- MUST be able to flip more than one page at a time — to emulate flipping through pages like a print book when skimming / looking for something. Holding down a button like flipping pages — customizable speed. Should also be able to flip “chunks”.
- eBook “Extras” — built in (English) dictionary, links to wikipedia, links to other works in library and links to internet (but ability to disguise/turn off links if desired to minimize cognitive load / undesired hypertext), lexicons/foreign language dictionaries with parsing as appropriate, dictionaries/encyclopedias, full text searches, text searches on title/header content, fuzzy searches, regex like fine grain searches, scrolling in-line notes (either personal — see annotation — or external like Bible commentaries or textual apparatuses), features like kindle x-ray for identifying characters and usage across a text, vocab builder tools
- Wear blue blocking glasses to reduce easily scattered blue light and increase contrast. Less blocking during the day for better/more true color on screens, and because our bodies expect higher blue levels during day. Full blocking a couple hours before bed to allow for melatonin. Wear prescription blue blocking glasses for long periods of computer use rather than contacts (which can lead to dry eyes).
